+++
date = "2018-02-15T12:02:58+01:00"
draft = true
tags = [ "wifi", "bufferbloat", "ath9k", "ath10k", "cable", "dsl", "5g" ]
title = "RFC8290 is published"
description = "Go forth and fix your fucking routers already!"
+++

And I naively thought then, that it would spread like wildfire. In addition to the bleeding edge 

But not far enough. Buried deep

How does an open source guy, - and ultimately into silicon.

My principal purpose was to describe the algorithms well enough for them to be recreated by both pro

And what Pete Heist calls "latency stress"

Match it to the capacity

1)

2) snuggled up close to the hardware, where the GPL cannot touch.

And lastly:

3) Try to reduce the technology to a checkbox item for future RFP by major organisations, governments, and ISPs.

Buyer: "Does this product have support for RFC8290?"
Seller: "No..."
Buyer: "Sorry, thanks for submitting."

And it showed how to better manage ring buffers at interrupt time. BQL: This is two function calls - 

Arguably 

It's needed in fiber ONTs

RFC8290 was [needed in ethernet]().

RFC8290 is [needed in Wifi](https://www.usenix.org/system/files/conference/atc17/atc17-hoiland-jorgensen.pdf). Despite having solved so thoroughly one of the most maddening things about wifi in "ending the anomaly", and having made the code available for 3 chipsets - [weakening the hardware mac retries](https://s3.amazonaws.com/academia.edu.documents/52796922/icn_2017_full.pdf?AWSAccessKeyId=AKIAIWOWYYGZ2Y53UL3A&Expires=1518121144&Signature=ozNFihOe43mOXoO3NgADoiSeIgs%3D&response-content-disposition=inline%3B%20filename%3DICN_2017_-_The_Sixteenth_International_C.pdf#page=81) is also a promising approach, and I hope one day someone will combine them. For all I know, 802.11ax is going to address latency issues all throughout modern wifi.

RFC8290 is [needed in 5G phones and ](). I'd go work on this but the only published source code for lte devices is based on linux 3.18... and I'd figured that the cell industry would have gotten the memo by now. 5G is supposed to solve everything, right? I'd love to start work on my own enode-b, actually.

It's [needed on DSL]()

It's [needed on cable](). I don't care (please go upgrade to a docsis 3.1 modem!) 

I've never worked so hard to give away something for free. Every day,
millions of devices ship that could be so much better. 

Leave 

I still have disappointments 

Hitchhikers guide to the galaxy, where the marketing execs stuck in
earth's distant past are sitting on the wheel, because they can't
decide what color it should be.

And I'm tired of building my own routers. I want to go to frys and buy something with RFC8290 complian stamped on the box. Heck, I'd love it
if I could buy a consumer switch that did it.
